Add blog post about ETS' decentralized counters (#24)
erlang/erlang.github.io: _posts/2021-08-03-scalable-ets-counters.md

---

A shared [Erlang Term Storage
(ETS)](https://erlang.org/doc/man/ets.html) table is often an
excellent place to store data that that is updated and read from
multiple Erlang processes frequently. ETS provides key-value stores to
Erlang processes. When the
[write_concurrency](https://erlang.org/doc/man/ets.html#new-2) option
is activated, ETS tables use fine-grained locking
internally. Therefore, a scenario where multiple processes insert and
remove different items in an ETS table should scale well with the
number of utilized cores. Unfortunately, in practice, the scalability
for such scenarios is not yet perfect. However, the ETS table option
[`decentralized_counters`](https://erlang.org/doc/man/ets.html#new-2)
(introduced in Erlang/OTP 22 for `ordered_set` tables and in
Erlang/OTP 23 for the other table types) has made the scalability much
better. A table with `decentralized_counters` activated uses
decentralized counters instead of centralized counters to track the
number of items in the table and the memory consumption. This blog
post will give you a better understanding of when one should activate
the `decentralized_counters` option and how the decentralized counters
work.

> 

Reviewer: I think it would be useful to mention already here in the introduction what the disadvantage of the `decentralized_counters` option is. If found myself reading through the rest of blog post quickly until I found that information at the end.

Author: Fixed in b8fb1b3. Please have a look to see if you think it is better now.

## Scalability with Decentralized ETS Counters

The following figure shows the throughput (operations/second) archived
when processes are doing inserts (`ets:insert/2`) and deletes
(`ets:delete/2`) to an ETS table of the `set` type on a machine with
64 hardware threads both when `decentralized_counters` option is
activated and when it is deactivated. The table types `bag` and
`duplicate_bag` have similar scalability behavior as their
implementation is based on the same hash table.

![alt text](/images/ets_scalable_counters/bench_set_50_ins_50_del_nospread.png "Throughput of inserts and deletes on a table of type set with and without the decentralized_counters activated")

The following figure shows the results for the same benchmark but with
a table of type `ordered_set`:

![alt text](/images/ets_scalable_counters/bench_ordset_50_ins_50_del_nospread.png "Throughput of inserts and deletes on a table of type ordered_set with and without the decentralized_counters activated")

The interested reader can find more benchmark results, benchmark
details, and the benchmark machine

> [here](http://winsh.me/ets_catree_benchmark/decent_ctrs_hash.html). The

Reviewer: It is considered bad practice used the word "here" as link text. I think you can shorten the sentence to "The interested reader can find more information about the benchmark." and anchor the link on "more information about the benchmark".

Author: Fixed in b8fb1b3. Please have a look to see if you think it is better now.

dynamically changes the locking granularity based on how much
contention is detected. This implementation difference explains the
difference in scalability between `set` and `ordered_set`. The
interested reader can find details about the `ordered_set`
implementation in an [earlier blog
post](https://blog.erlang.org/the-new-scalable-ets-ordered_set/).

Worth noting is also that the Erlang VM that ran the benchmarks has
been compiled with the configure option "`./configure
--with-ets-write-concurrency-locks=256`". The configure option
`--with-ets-write-concurrency-locks=256` changes the number of locks
for hash-based ETS tables from the current default of 64 to 256 (256
is currently the max value one can set this configuration option
to). Changing the implementation of the hash-based tables so that one
can set the number of locks per table instance or so that the lock
granularity is adjusted automatically seems like an excellent future
improvement, but this is not what this blog post is about.

A centralized counter consists of a single memory word that is
incremented and decremented with atomic instructions. The problem with

> a centralized counter is, of course, that modifications of the counter

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a centralized counter is that modifications of the counter
```

frequent modifications of a single memory word by multiple cores cause
a lot of expensive traffic in the [cache
coherence](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cache_coherence)
system. However, reading from a centralized counter is quite efficient
as the reader only has to read a single memory word.

When designing the decentralized counters for ETS, we have tried to
optimize for update performance and scalability as most applications
need to get the size of an ETS table relatively rarely. However, since
there may be applications out in the wild that frequently call
[`ets:info(Table, size)`](https://erlang.org/doc/man/ets.html#info-2)
and [`ets:info(Table,
memory)`](https://erlang.org/doc/man/ets.html#info-2), we have chosen
to make decentralized counters optional. Another thing that might be
worth keeping in mind is that the hash-based tables use a different
heuristic to decide when the number of buckets shall grow and shrink
when decentralized counters are activated. The hash table heuristics
for growing and shrinking used together with decentralized counters
tend to lead to tables that use slightly more memory than the default

> heuristics.

Reviewer: Why was a different heuristics chosen? Is it faster, or necessary for the implementation of decentralized counters to work well?

Author: Perhaps it is wrong to say that the heuristics changed.

We use the same heuristics but instead of being based on the exact number of items in the table it is based on an estimate (i.e., the number of items protected by the current bucket lock times the number of buckets). This tend to lead to larger tables (at least for small tables) as growing is done more eagerly than shrinking. I will try to reformulate to make this more clear.

Author: Using the decentralized counters to get an estimate would be too slow without doing a major change of the resizing logic as it would require going through all slots in the counter array every time an update is done . However, if one just checked if resizing is necessary every K operations, one could do that as well but I think that would complicate the code a little bit more and it is uncertain if it would give any benefits.

Author: Fixed in b8fb1b3. Please have a look to see if you think it is better now.

   update a counter in the old array have completed their updates. As
   mentioned, this can be done using the [Erlang VM's thread progress
   system](https://github.com/erlang/otp/blob/7c06ca6231b812965305522284dd9f2653ced98d/erts/emulator/internal_doc/ThreadProgress.md). After
   that, the reader can safely calculate the sum of counters in the
   old counter array (the sum is 1406). The calculated sum is also
   given to the process that requested the count so that it can
   continue execution.
   
   ![alt text](/images/ets_scalable_counters/snap_ani_3.png "Step 4")

* **[Step 5]**
   
   The read operation is not done, even though we have successfully
   calculated a count. One must add the calculated sum from the old
   array to the new array to avoid losing something.
   
   ![alt text](/images/ets_scalable_counters/snap_ani_4.png "Step 5")

* **[Step 6]**
   
   Finally, the `snapshot_ongoing` field in the new counter array is
   set to `false` so that other read operations can swap out the new
   counter array.
   
   ![alt text](/images/ets_scalable_counters/snap_ani_5.png "Step 6")

Now, you should have got a basic understanding of how ETS'

> decentralized counters work. You are also very welcome to look at the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
decentralized counters work. You are also welcome to look at the
```

source code in
[erl_flxctr.c](https://github.com/erlang/otp/blob/ce7dbe8742e66f4632b5d39a9b4d7aa461e4f164/erts/emulator/beam/erl_flxctr.c)
and
[erl_flxctr.h](https://github.com/erlang/otp/blob/ce7dbe8742e66f4632b5d39a9b4d7aa461e4f164/erts/emulator/beam/erl_flxctr.h)
if you are interested in details of the implementation.

As you can imagine, reading the value of a decentralized counter with,
for example, `ets:info(Table, size)` is extremely slow compared to a
centralized counter. Fortunately, most time that is spent reading the
value of a decentralized counter is spent waiting for the thread
progress system to report that it is safe to read the swapped-out array,
and the read operation does not block any scheduler and does not
consume any CPU time during this time. On the other hand, the
decentralized counter can be updated in a very efficient and scalable
way, so using decentralized counters is most likely to prefer, if you

> seldom need to get the size and the memory consummation of your shared

Reviewer: ```suggestion
seldom need to get the size and the memory consumed by your shared
```

"consummation" means [something else](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Consummation).
